# Retrievable Metadata

</br>

Most users of the internet retrieve data by ‘clicking on a link’. This  is a high-level interface to a low-level protocol called tcp, that the  computer executes to load data in the user’s web browser. Note that  http(s) or ftp, which form the backbone of modern internet, are built on tcp, and make requesting and providing digital resources substantially easier than other communication protocols.

Principle A1 states that  FAIR data retrieval should be mediated without specialised or proprietary tools or communication methods. This principle focuses on how data and metadata can be retrieved from their identifiers.

</br>

**A1.1 - Open Protocol**

To maximise data reuse, the protocol should be free (no-cost) and open (-sourced) and thus globally implementable to facilitate data retrieval. Anyone with a computer and an internet connection can access at least  the metadata. Hence, this criterion will impact your choice of the  repository where you will share your data.

</br>

**A1.2 - Authentication Protocol**

This is a key, but often misunderstood, element of FAIR. The ‘A’ in FAIR does not necessarily mean ‘open’ or ‘free’. Rather, it implies that one should provide the exact conditions under which the data are accessible. Hence, even heavily protected and private data can be FAIR. 

Ideally, accessibility is specified in such a way that a machine can  automatically understand the requirements, and then either automatically execute the requirements or alert the user to the requirements. It often makes sense to request users to create a user account for a repository. This allows to authenticate the owner (or contributor) of each dataset, and to potentially set user-specific rights. Hence, this criterion will also affect your choice of the repository where you will  share your data.

</br>

 [`A1: (Meta)data are retrievable by their identifier using a standardised communication protocol`](https://www.go-fair.org/fair-principles/metadata-retrievable-identifier-standardised-communication-protocol/)