# Data minimization
The aim of this branch of PETs is to minimize or obscure the data so that it becomes impossible toto mitigate the risk of reidentify reidentifying to the personal levelthe subjects. Traditionally this was done by removal of data expected to reveal a subject’s identity. For example, by removing names, addresses or other attributes that could be used to retrace ones identity, privacy was thought to be safeguarded. The problem with large sets of data that it is not sufficient to merely remove the obvious personal data. Research has demonstrated that one can often find unique combinations of attributes that can reidentify individuals making up the data. Therefore, more recent developments in data minimalization have been aimed at removing the link between an individual’s identity and their record in the data by first finding these unique combinations of attributes and then blurring or destroying them. 
A subtype of minimalization is pseudo-anonymization. Pseudonymization is defined within the GDPR as “the processing of personal data in such a way that the data can no longer be attributed to a specific data subject without the use of additional information, as long as such additional information is kept separately and subject to technical and organizational measures to ensure non-attribution to an identified or identifiable individual”. 

In a data ecosystem, the first step then would be to predict those combinations of attributes after which one removes or suppresses these from the data. After this is done, one can share the data safely with other members of the ecosystem. Methods of determining if one obtained privacy in a given datasets can be found using measures such as k-anonymity, l-diversity and t-closeness . 

K-anonymity gained large scale media attention when in 2018 it was used by Junade Ali to create a protocol based on hashing used to anonymously verify if a password was leaked in any large scale database breaches . Implementations of k-anonymity are provided by commercial parties such as Google  and Privitar  among others.
